
CHINESE MARKET ENTRY

Everything you need to know about entering the world’s largest market


Jim Coke PhD


2023 Edition









Copyright © Jim Coke 2023

All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission of this publication may be made without written permission.

No portion of this publication may be reproduced, copied or transmitted save with the written permission or in accordance with the provisions of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, or under the terms of any licence permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, Saffron House, 6-10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.

Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to this publication may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.

The author has asserted his right to be identified as the author of this work in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.








Dedication

THIS BOOK IS dedicated to Mrs. Glory Coke. Only God knows the number of times you were on your knees interceding on my behalf.



























Acknowledgement


UNDOUBTEDLY I OWE a debt of gratitude to very many people all of whom I can’t mention here due to very limited space. However, when they read the pages they will recognise themselves and how much they have supported and encouraged me ever since I arrived in Hong Kong.
Words cannot capture the debt of gratitude I have for my late mother who showed me by example. Bringing me up as a single mother and running a business single handedly; she taught me that it could be done. As she would constantly remind me, I have only myself to look after so there are really no obstacles in my way except those that I place myself.
Without Dr. Kate Pretty, I am not sure how my life would have turned out. She fought to keep me at Cambridge even though I did not deserve to be there. To her I am eternally thankful and grateful that she saw something in me that was worth keeping. On that note, I have to include Professor Michael Reiss and Stephen Tomkins who both saw something in me worth saving.
Boxing for many years taught me to fight but no other person has pushed me as far as David Byrne, my former boxing coach. Those years of blood sweat and tears (in every sense of the word) and the gruelling 3-minute rounds prepared me for my bouts but also life outside of the ring where bouts lasted years. Only God knows how I got through those years.
Through the turbulent times of writing this book, Dr. Sam Beatson has observed the birth of my ideas, offered constructive criticisms, counselled me on some of my choices and questioned many of my decisions as well as proofreading. Many things would not have been accomplished without his support.
If I was a professional sportsman or athlete, I could be the best in the world but still need a coach. In business, my coach and mentor is Bak Chai Tan (if written properly, it's Tan Bak Chai). Ever since we worked at the same recruitment firm, Bak Chai has generously advised me on business, manufacturing and life in Asia. He introduced me to my first overseas distributor, "coached" me on the ins and outs of production in mainland China, supported me when my cashflow was tight and corrected some of my crazy wacky ideas. In fact, I credit him for teaching me how to be a Chinese businessman and not a 'gwailo' doing business in China.
Writing a book of this nature is bound to be difficult where accuracy is concerned in trying to relate some of my experiences. Even though the time period is not that long, there is the temptation to embellish some of the events. I believe I have endeavoured to report as accurately as possible all that transpired since my arrival to Hong Kong in 2010. 
Of course, many events have been omitted if I considered them irrelevant or to protect the anonymity of some of the identities. Where characters are mentioned in the story, their real names have been used and their permission has already been obtained.









Preface

MOST BOOKS ON China and business are very heavy on anecdotal evidence and generate theory from a few examples. I find that hard to understand given just how heterogenous China is. Nonetheless, I intend to break from the pack and write with two types of audience in mind; the entrepreneur and the academic. An odd approach but I consider myself as both. 
I arrived in Hong Kong in 2010 with a job in finance. Eventually that led me to starting my own company in the same year and doing it full time two years later. Unlike other Western entrepreneurs, I wanted to get away from the expat bubble and immerse myself into the local culture. 
My business started in the ‘ghetto’ of Hong Kong (Tin Shui Wai) where I had no friends, contacts or partners and hardly spoke a word of Cantonese. By all accounts, it was a ‘splendid isolationism’ and designed to think, and reason like the Chinese. 
As much as possible, I have restricted my personal experiences in this book to a minimum for I do not believe they can be used to define what entrepreneurship is or should be or indeed bear a reflection of how entrepreneurship takes place in China. 
The truth is that this book is partly a response to the demands of my PhD and hence the audience that flows from it. At the same time, I want to write a manual for other entrepreneurs who will embark on that “slow boat to China.” Therefore, I will deliberately avoid using formal academic language but instead write in a conversational style with simple and precise language. 
However, the book will be heavily referenced with research papers I read during my doctoral studies including market reports, Chinese government policies, whitepapers and reports, newspaper articles, Chinese websites etc. Of course, I will endeavour to triangulate all the information in this book but I am mindful that Chinese laws and regulations can change overnight thus changing procedures and processes of third parties.
Ultimately, the book should be a roadmap for the entrepreneur who is determined to seek their fortunes in the Red Dragon. A nickname for China













Contents
Contents
ENTREPRENEURSHIP	7
INTRODUCTION	7




ENTREPRENEURSHIP
INTRODUCTION
When I was 5 years old, my mother always told me that happiness was the key to life. When I went to school, they asked me what I wanted to be when I grew up. I wrote down “happy.” They told me I didn’t understand the assignment, and I told them they didn’t understand life.

Anonymous

ENTREPRENEURSHIP IS THE new gold rush. The mere mention of the subject and you will generate a plethora of opinions as diverse as the people giving them. Throw in China and the subject moves unto culture, food, politics and human rights very quickly.  
This book is about both almost in equal measure. It was written with the view that I could look back on myself 10 years ago and imagine a virtual assistant telling me what to expect and what to avoid when it comes to entrepreneurship and China. Somehow, I hope to conflate the two subjects into one enjoyable piece of story-telling, mixed in with advice, tales of caution, research findings, and recommendations. 
Entrepreneurship has spawned stories of incredible feats of innovation, determination, tribulation and triumph as well as failures. It has generated a plethora of new words and changed our modern lexicon. In the last 20 years, the innovations of entrepreneurial companies e.g. Facebook, Twitter etc. has even ignited revolutions in countries most people don’t know what main language is spoken. Products of entrepreneurship have even defined the way we work from Riyadh to Rotterdam to Rio de Janeiro. 
Like the gold rush of the 19th century, the possibility of untold riches has drawn prospectors to the arena. And like the gold rush, few will find gold. The rest will either make an alternative living or return to where they came from. Lessons from that part of history have shaped this book and it will try and do two things; first, provide a guide and second, provide a commentary of entrepreneurship in the world’s largest gold rush, Chinese entrepreneurship.
Definitions of entrepreneurship and particularly entrepreneurship as it pertains to China are difficult to describe. Therefore, at the end of reading this book, you will have your own definition, maybe two or three with various qualifications. That is how difficult this subject is to capture but nonetheless still fascinating. Notwithstanding, a brief history of western entrepreneurship will be outlined in the next section of this chapter.
Stories of entrepreneurs abound in every media one can think of; particularly social media. In fact, the commonest of all, Facebook, comes immediately to mind. The success of Mark Zuckerberg often denigrates the failures of thousands of other entrepreneurs who have tried to follow his footsteps and replicate his business model. But replicating his model, or the model of others in the western hemisphere is unwise for China. 
After all, they have managed to transform their economy from an agrarian monolith in 1949 to the largest in the world by 2017 (in terms of purchasing power parity). All of this has been based on principles honed over 60 years of communism! Maybe the West needs to learn entrepreneurship from China? Two analogies might best explain the premise of this book. The first comes from the original title and the second from Florentine painters. 
If you want a fat cow in China……….. was coined from the African saying; ‘If you want a fat cow, feed it yourself’. African sayings, like proverbs, conceal a truth in metaphor. A man’s wealth in Africa was often exemplified by the amount of livestock in his possessions and cows were the largest domesticated livestock one could possess. Obviously, the fatter the cow the wealthier the individual. The saying, in other words, extols the requirement to constantly feed one’s cow as the only prerequisite to real wealth. 
Not just to let the cow wander in fields with the hope it will find greener pastures but to deliberately and constructively make efforts to overfeed the cow. This metaphor signifies more action than reaction. It resonates the need to go all out to make something happen. If one were to live in China for any length of time or have any exposure or immersion to the culture, the desire to get rich is more than just a desire; it’s a religion.
The second analogy comes from the notion often held that entrepreneurship cannot be taught but merely courted. Entrepreneurial flair is nature and not nurture or so the argument goes. Now let us look at the Florentine painters and sculptors in the 14th century. Art was considered a gift, a natural talent that was honed and perfected under a master. It was more than an apprenticeship, first beginning as a pupil then moving unto assistant, then artist and eventually master. It was a calling; few were called and even fewer were chosen. 
Art was not taught but practiced. Eventually the apprenticeship scheme gave way to formal academies in Florence in the 16th century. Artists believed that art was not just a calling but could be taught even with modest or mediocre talent. Artists were taught to demonstrate their learning and proficiency in their chosen skill. It wasn’t necessarily implied that they would go on to become great artists but they were adequately trained and versed in the rudiments and principles of their chosen discipline. That was true then and to this day. Just like art, entrepreneurship can and should be taught.
This book attempts to set out a road map for beginning a start-up in China. The fundamentals can easily be applied to any part of the world but the contents have been geared towards China, using Hong Kong as the starting point. Therefore, no knowledge of the region is assumed and the reader is expected to use this book as a springboard for further investigation. Particularly as Chinese laws and regulations can change overnight. 
With few exceptions, English is used entirely in this book and where there is a disparity or contradiction between English and Chinese, the English meaning will be supported with additional synonyms for clarity. Given the potential to step into a minefield with respect to the political ramifications of acknowledging Taiwan, every attempt will be made to treat China as three entities; People’s Republic of China, Hong Kong SAR and Macao From 1st January 2016, ‘Macao’ became the only official English spelling of the region; ‘Macau’ is no longer acceptable.
 SAR although a brief explanation will be offered to put the Taiwan conundrum into context.
Additionally, this book was written at the same time I was conducting research on my doctoral thesis which looked at Why and How Foreign Entrepreneurs Enter China? Given my position, I had to wear two hats; one as a somewhat experienced China professional who has actually lived in China and started a business from scratch and the other as an academic in training. 
As much as possible, I tried to let this book convey the latter than the former. Too many books on China are based on anecdotal evidence and not real research. Therefore, many of the assumptions and findings are based on actual research where I got entrepreneurs in China to give me their thoughts on a range of subjects but primarily subjects that correspond with the contents of this book. To convey the thoughts of actual entrepreneurs, I conducted a pilot study asking entrepreneurs in China on various topics. The results are analysed and published at the end of the book. Some of the responses contradict my own findings while a lot of them corroborate the many assertions in this book. Their validity and usefulness will be left to the reader to decide. 
In other words, what you will find in this book will be a mixture of various sources but supported by what REAL entrepreneurs in China think on the subject. The tone will be conversational in the most part but supported by heavy academic referencing. Please bear in mind that the heavy referencing is to justify some of my assertions and not to interrupt the flow of the book.
Finally, this book for me is redemption. The chapter began with a quote and now I will explain why I chose it (the other quotes at the beginning of the other chapters are self-explanatory and relevant for the topic to be discussed). It is hard to reconcile that I left my home in England and practically spent my 30s in Asia. 
I rarely returned because I was happy exploring; not planting roots and starting a family but just exploring. Somehow, the years rolled by and I was not able to formulate a direction; I just reacted to circumstances because they felt right and it made me happy. Writing a book about entrepreneurship is my chance to redeem a happy decade and somehow etch it into posterity.

